Documentation for add an answer for 'none of the above' (#251)
alphagov/forms: design/features/add-answer-for-none-of-the-above/version-1.md

## Status
- Date released: 16 January 2026
- [Epic Trello card](https://trello.com/c/4G5NLRvN)
- [Let people add an answer if ‘none of the above’ is selected feature document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Urs-5dWqS5GVL283OfxaA7mPcAHpMpSa2UbLLIWO5hg/edit?pli=1&tab=t.0) 
- [Mural board](https://app.mural.co/t/gaap0347/m/gaap0347/1760012750571/b19691c8f6154638b5782f172d311831a63a7af4)

## Contents

> - [What](#what)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [What is this feature?](#what-is-this-feature)
```
Think this link needs updated to the heading

- Allow form creators to ask for more than 1 answer type when none-of-the-above is selected
- Offer a multi-line text area for form filler’s answer
- Allow form creators to decide what the content for the none-of-the-above option is (for example, ‘Other’)

### Design decisions

- We’ll let form creators choose if they want to allow people to give a different answer if they select ‘none of the above’ to a selection question.
- We’ll add a new radio option when form creators answer the question ‘Should the list include an option for ‘None of the above’?’. As well as ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ options, form creators will be able to choose ‘Yes, and let people provide a different answer’. 
- If this new option is selected, we’ll show form fillers a text box to enter their answer when they select ‘None of the above’. We’ll need to ask form creators for a question or label for this new input field.
- We’ll let form creators select whether an answer to this ‘additional’ question is mandatory or not.
- We’ll use the standard form-filler error messages for radios, checkboxes and single lines of text. 

> - It’s fine to add a second page for questions with long lists (that use the select/autocomplete component) to ask for the answer if they select ‘none of the above’. This shouldn’t interfere with routing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When the initial question has a long list of options (and uses the select/autocomplete component), we'll add a second page for the additional 'none of the above' question - we checked that this would be possible without interfering with routing
```

- We need to consider related changes in form submissions and in the details page for live or archived forms. 

### ‘Other’ v ‘none of the above’
We briefly talked about whether we should change ‘none of the above’ to ‘other’, or allow people to change the wording themselves. We’ve had some people ask about this in feedback and Zendesk requests. 

It was noted that ‘other’ implies that there IS a different answer, whereas ‘none of the above’ does not suggest this as much.

While it was agreed that ‘other’ might feel more appropriate than 'none of the above' if someone is able to add another answer, ‘none of the above’ works for both instances - where there is another answer AND where there is not. We think this is probably why we used ‘None of the above’ for list questions initially.

So while we’re not allowing people to select or change how it’s worded, we agreed to stick with ‘None of the above’ and leave any changes for a future iteration. 

## Designs and content

### Summary of new designs and content

> When a form creator creates a ‘Selection from a list of options’ question, and having added their question text, they’re taken to a ‘Create a list of options’ page. This is the case whether someone selects ‘one option only’ or ‘one or more options’, or whether they choose to enter all the options into one text box. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a form creator creates a ‘Selection from a list of options’ question, they add their question text, select ‘one option only’ or ‘one or more options’, then they’re taken to a ‘Create a list of options’ page.
```
This wasn't quite right as if they choose to enter all the options into one text box they're taken to a different page. So have tweaked it and simplified it a bit. Think we can add a mention of the 'Enter your list’s options into a text box' page later on?

Author: Thanks for clarifying this!

On this page, there’s an ‘Add options to your list’ legend, followed by text boxes where form creators can add the relevant answer options to their list. 

This is followed by an H2 heading that reads ‘Should the list include an option for none of the above?’. 

Previously, a form creator had only 2 radio button options to choose from - ‘Yes’ and ‘No’. Under ‘Yes’ the hint text said ‘If you select ‘Yes’ we’ll add ‘None of the above’ to the end of your list of options’. 

This new feature adds a third radio option with the label ‘Yes, and let people provide a different answer’. This sits between the ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ radio options.

The hint text has been moved from the ‘Yes’ radio option to under the H2 heading ‘Should the list include an option for ‘None of the above’?’. This is because there are now 2 ‘Yes’ options to choose from and it makes more sense to have the hint text at the top as it applies to both.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

We've made the same changes to the equivalent question on the 'Enter your list’s options into a text box' page - which people can chose to use rather than entering the options individually.

```

- Submission email (iteration)
- CSV file (iteration)
- JSON file (iteration)
- Question X, for radio and checkboxes - form filler additional question view (iteration) 
- Question X, autocomplete - form filler view (iteration) 
- Question Xa, autocomplete - form filler view (new)
- ‘Check your answers’ page - form filler view (iteration) 

### ‘Create a list of options’ page - new radio option

<img alt="screenshot is described in the following content" src="Screenshots/001-create-list-of-options-page-new-radio.png" width="500">

**Description of the image and changes made:**

This screenshot shows the H1 page heading ‘Create a list of options’. This is the third page form creators will see when creating a ‘Selection from a list of options’ question - after ‘What’s your question?’ and ‘How many options should people be able to select?’. 

The H1 is followed by content explaining how many options form fillers can select from the list and how they can do this.

Below that, form fillers can add options to their list in the usual way, adding more text boxes as needed. 

There’s then an H2 that reads: 

> Should the list include an option for ‘None of the above’?

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This is followed by hint text that says:

 > If you select ‘Yes’ we’ll add ‘None of the above’ to the end of your list of options.
 
```

If form creators select this option, they’ll be taken to the ‘Ask for an answer if someone selects ‘None of the above’’ page. 

If they select the ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ radio options instead, they’ll be taken straight to the ‘Edit question’ page, as usual. 

The new ‘none of the above’ radio option also appears on the page that form creators see if they choose to enter all the options into one text box.

### ‘Ask for an answer if someone selects ‘None of the above’’ - new page

<img alt="screenshot is described in the following content" src="Screenshots/002-ask-for-an-answer-page.png" width="500">

**Description of the image:**

This screenshot shows the new page that lets form creators enter a question or label for the text box form fillers will see if they select ‘none of the above’.   

The H1 heading reads:

> Ask for an answer if someone selects ‘None of the above’

Below this is some text that says:

> If someone selects ‘None of the above’, we’ll show them a text box to enter their answer.

That’s followed by a label that reads:

> ‘Enter a question or label for the text box’

The hint text beneath this is:

> > For example, if you asked them to select the country they live in, you could use ‘Enter the country you live in’

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> For example, if you asked them to select the country they live in, you could use ‘Enter the country you live in’.
```

Beneath the text box where form creators can add their label or question is an H2 heading that reads:

> Should this additional question be mandatory or optional? 

We added the word ‘additional’ here to help form creators understand that we’re not referring to the main question.

As usual, the 2 radio buttons are labelled ‘Mandatory’ and ‘Optional’, and the hint text under ‘Optional’ says that we’ll add ‘Optional’ to the end of the question or label.  

### ‘Edit question’ page - new row under ‘Answer settings’

<img alt="screenshot is described in the following content" src="Screenshots/003-edit-question-page.png" width="500">

This screenshot shows the page that form creators see once they’ve added options to their select-from-a-list question.

> The page’s H1 is ‘Edit question’. This is followed by the usual ‘Question text’ and ‘Hint text (optional)’ text boxes and the H2 heading ‘Guidance’. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The page’s H1 is ‘Edit question’. This is followed by the usual ‘Question text’ and ‘Hint text (optional)’ text boxes and the H2 heading ‘Guidance’. 

```

Beneath this is the usual H2 ‘Answer settings’ with a summary list showing 5 rows. Each row is divided by a grey horizontal line. 

The 5 row headings are:

> Answer type
> Options
> How many options can people select
> Include an option for ‘none of the above’

> > If ‘none of the above’ is selected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Answer type  
> Options  
> How many options can people select  
> Include an option for ‘none of the above’  
> If ‘none of the above’ is selected  
```
To make sure they fall onto new lines it needs to end with double spaces, or it could be changed to a bulleted list.
